Add priv_exp (#16)
cose-wg/draft-ietf-cose-dilithium: draft-ietf-cose-dilithium.md

This section describes a generic cryptographic key structure for use with algorithms not limited to those registered in this document.
The Algorithm Key Pair (AKP) Type is used to express Public and Private Keys for use with Algorithms.
The concept of public and private information classes for key pairs originates from {{Section 8.1 of RFC7517}}.
The parameters for public and private information classes contain byte strings in a format specified by the "alg" value.
The "alg" JSON Web Key Parameter or COSE Key Common Parameter is REQUIRED for all AKP keys.
The "pub" parameter contains public information and is REQUIRED.
The "priv" parameter contains private information and MUST NOT be present in public keys.

Some algorithm specifications, such as ML-DSA, might allow for use of multiple key type parameters for private information.
When registering new algorithms, use of multiple key type parameters for private information is NOT RECOMMENDED.

The "seed" parameter contains private information and MUST NOT be present in public keys.

> 

Reviewer: This does not seem to say what to do with algorithms without defined seed expansion, or that seed and private key are supposed to match if both are present (AKP is supposed to be much more generic than just ML-DSA). Copying earlier suggested text as suggested change:

```suggestion

If the associated "alg" value does not define seed expansion, then "seed" parameter MUST NOT be present, and the "priv" parameter is used for the private key, if present.

If both "seed" and "priv" parameters are present, then the seed in "seed" parameter MUST expand to the key in "priv" parameter following the seed expansion procedure for the associated "alg" value.
```

The Algorithm Key Pair (AKP) Type is used to express Public and Private Keys for use with Algorithms.
When this key type is used the "alg" JSON Web Key Parameter or COSE Key Common Parameter is REQUIRED.

The concept of public and private information classes for key pairs originates from {{Section 8.1 of RFC7517}}.

The "pub" parameter contains a public key, this parameter contains public information and is REQUIRED.
Typically, a single "priv" parameter is necessary to express the private information needed to represent a private key.

> When registering new algorithms, use of multiple labels for private information is NOT RECOMMENDED.

Author: ```suggestion
When registering new algorithms, use of multiple key parameters for private information is NOT RECOMMENDED.
```

The key parameters for public and private information classes contain byte strings in a format specified by the "alg" value.
These classes MAY have additional structure or length checks depending on the associated "alg" parameter and its requirements.

> When AKP keys are expressed in JWK, values for the public and private information classes are base64url encoded.

Author: ```suggestion
When AKP keys are expressed in JWK, key parameters are base64url encoded.
```

The Algorithm Key Pair (AKP) Type is used to express Public and Private Keys for use with Algorithms.
When this key type is used the "alg" JSON Web Key Parameter or COSE Key Common Parameter is REQUIRED.

The concept of public and private information classes for key pairs originates from {{Section 8.1 of RFC7517}}.

The "pub" parameter contains a public key, this parameter contains public information and is REQUIRED.

> The label(s) for private information is dependent on the "alg" parameter.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Typically, a single "priv" parameter is necessary to express the private information needed to represent a private key.
When registering new algorithms, use of multiple labels for private information is NOT RECOMMENDED.

> The public and private information classes contain byte strings in a format specified by the "alg" value.

Author: ```suggestion
The key parameters for public and private information classes contain byte strings in a format specified by the "alg" value.
```

   / kid /   2: h'b8969ab4b37da9f068...6f0583bf5b8d3a8059a',
   / kty /   1: 7, / AKP /
   / alg /   3: -48, / ML-DSA-44 /
   / pub  / -1: h'ba71f9f64e11baeb589...3830546b9dd8db0d',

>    / priv / -2: h'00000000000000...0000000000000000'

Author: ```suggestion
   / seed / -3: h'00000000000000...0000000000000000'
```

# ML-DSA Private Keys

Note that FIPS 204 defines 2 expressions for private keys: a seed (priv), and a private key that is expanded from the seed (priv_exp).

Similar to {{-ML-DSA-CERTS}} the following cases are possible:

1. Only the "priv" parameter is present.
2. Only the "priv_exp" parameter is present.
3. Both parameters are present.

For ML-DSA keys, when "priv" is present, it MUST have a length of 32 bytes.

> When both "priv" and "priv_exp" are present, the "priv" parameter MUST expand to the "priv_exp" parameter.

Author: ```suggestion
When both "priv" and "priv_exp" are present, the "priv" parameter MUST expand to the "priv_exp" parameter.
See Security Considerations of this document for details.
```

# ML-DSA Private Keys

Note that FIPS 204 defines 2 expressions for private keys: a seed (priv), and a private key that is expanded from the seed (priv_exp).

Similar to {{-ML-DSA-CERTS}} the following cases are possible:

> 1. Only the "priv" parameter is present.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Only the "seed" parameter is present.
```

> 2. Only the "priv_exp" parameter is present.

Author: ```suggestion
2. Only the "priv" parameter is present.
```

3. Both parameters are present.

> 

Author: cc @simo5 per discussion on the list.

This would assume we apply the suggestions to rename "priv" -> "seed" and "priv_exp" -> "priv".

> For ML-DSA keys, when "priv" is present, it MUST have a length of 32 bytes.

Author: ```suggestion
For ML-DSA keys, when "seed" is present, it MUST have a length of 32 bytes.
```

> When both "priv" and "priv_exp" are present, the "priv" parameter MUST expand to the "priv_exp" parameter.

Author: ```suggestion
When both "seed" and "priv" are present, the "seed" parameter MUST expand to the "priv" parameter.
```

See Security Considerations of this document for details.

> Here is an ellided example of the case where both "priv" and "priv_exp" are present:

Author: ```suggestion
Here is an elided example of the case where both "seed" and "priv" are present:
```

~~~
{
   "kid": "T4xl70S7MT6Zeq6r9V9fPJGVn76wfnXJ21-gyo0Gu6o",
   "kty": "AKP",
   "alg": "ML-DSA-44",
   "pub": "unH59k4Ru...DZgbTP07e7gEWzw4MFRrndjbDQ",

>    "priv": "AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA",

Author: ```suggestion
   "seed": "AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA",
```

>    "priv_exp": "129kadu...DZgbTP07e7gEWzw4MFRr54"

Author: ```suggestion
   "priv": "129kadu...DZgbTP07e7gEWzw4MFRr54"
```

}
~~~

> {: #json-web-key-example-both-present align="left" title="The all zeros ML-DSA-44 JSON Web Key with both priv and priv_exp parameters"}

Author: ```suggestion
{: #json-web-key-example-both-present align="left" title="The all zeros ML-DSA-44 JSON Web Key with both seed and priv parameters"}
```

| ML-DSA-87  | 4896 | 2592 | 4627
{: #fips-204-table-2 align="left" title="Sizes (in bytes) of keys and signatures of ML-DSA"}

> Note that "priv" size is always 32 bytes, and that KeyGen_internal is called to produce the private key sizes for "priv_exp" in the table above.

Author: ```suggestion
Note that "seed" size is always 32 bytes, and that KeyGen_internal is called to produce the private key sizes for "priv" in the table above.
```

## Validation of keys

When an AKP algorithm requires or encourages that a key be validated before being used, all algorithm related key parameters MUST be validated.

Section 7.2 of FIPS-204 describes the encoding of ML-DSA keys and signatures.
The "pub" key parameter MUST be validated according to the pkEncode and pkDecode algorithms before being used.
For the ML-DSA algorithms registered in this document, the "priv" key parameter is a seed, and as such only a length check MUST be performed.
The length of the seed is 256 bits, which is 32 bytes.

> However, if the private key ("priv_exp") is derived from the seed using KeyGen_internal is stored as part of some implementation, the skEncode and skDecode algorithms MUST be used.

Author: ```suggestion
However, if the private key ("priv") is derived from the seed using KeyGen_internal is stored as part of some implementation, the skEncode and skDecode algorithms MUST be used.
```

* Description: Public key
* Reference: RFC XXXX

> ### ML-DSA Private Key Seed

Author: ```suggestion
### ML-DSA Private Key
```

* Name: priv
* Label: -2
* CBOR Type: bstr
* Description: Private key
* Reference: RFC XXXX

> ### ML-DSA Private Key Expanded
> 
> * Key Type: TBD (requested assignment 7)
> * Name: priv_exp
> * Label: -3
> * CBOR Type: bstr
> * Description: Private key expanded form

Author: ```suggestion
### ML-DSA Private Key Seed

* Key Type: TBD (requested assignment 7)
* Name: seed
* Label: -3
* CBOR Type: bstr
* Description: Private key seed
```

* Change Controller: IETF
* Specification Document(s): RFC XXXX

> #### AKP Private Key Seed

Author: ```suggestion
#### AKP Private Key
```

#### AKP Private Key

* Parameter Name: priv
* Parameter Description: Private key
* Used with "kty" Value(s): AKP
* Parameter Information Class: Private
* Change Controller: IETF
* Specification Document(s): RFC XXXX

> #### AKP Private Key Expanded
> 
> * Parameter Name: priv_exp
> * Parameter Description: Private key expanded form

Author: ```suggestion
#### AKP Private Key Seed

* Parameter Name: seed
* Parameter Description: Private key seed
```
